# Economics of Education Final Project

## Overview
The Covid-19 pandemic disrupted almost every aspect of students’ high school education, including standardized testing typically required for college admissions. The SAT canceled many of its testing dates in the spring of 2020 following the initial outbreak. Both the SAT and ACT planned to offer remote versions of their exams; however, the difficulties associated with a 3-hour long digital exam prevented the SAT from following through with that promise (Hartocollis). In addition to disruptions in the testing process itself, general challenges in education presented themselves that affected students’ ability to properly prepare for the exams. With remote learning, many students encountered issues with being able to fully engage with material that may be present on these standardized tests. Additionally, mental health became a primary concern with the lack of socialization and general uncertainty having an extremely detrimental effect on many teenagers (Grubic, et al.), and this national decline in mental health could have presented itself in SAT and ACT outcomes. Using regression analysis, this study aims to answer whether these various consequences of the Covid-19 pandemic did manifest themselves negatively in college-bound students’ standardized test scores and how any changes in these results could impact the college admissions landscape.

Due to these uncertainties of standardized testing, colleges reexamined whether these measures were actually necessary to evaluate students’ academic potential. This reevaluation resulted in the number of schools with test-optional policies increasing from 713 to 1,350 in 2020 (Lovell). Although these kinds of policies increased dramatically during the pandemic, many schools already had them in place. Often schools decided to implement them in order to increase the diversity of their institution since many of the factors that are associated with a poor performance on these exams are linked to a students’ race and income level (Soares). A 2015 study by Belasco, et al. looks at the relationship between test-optional policies and the proportion of minority and low-income students as well as the growth in schools’ institutional standings. Their findings indicate that often test-optional policies only create greater selectivity within schools and do not enhance diversity (Belasco et al.). Although the models created in this study will be focused primarily on general trends surrounding ACT scores, the results could potentially help confirm the findings of Belasco’s study given that the sample size of test-optional schools has almost doubled since 2015. 

## Methods
The data used in this study were collected from four datasets published by the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System which is part of the National Center for Education Statistics (“IPEDS Data Center”). The first type of dataset pertained to admissions and test scores for 2,011 colleges and universities in the United States. Both the 2019 and 2020 datasets were obtained and these contained variables such as the 25th percentile and 75th percentile for both SAT and ACT scores of applied students broken down by subject area. It also included enrollment numbers by both gender and student enrollment status. The second type of dataset pertained to demographic characteristics of students enrolled in the school. These variables contain more detailed information on race which includes data for both total numbers of students as well as number of male and female students of each race. 

To analyze how the pandemic has impacted the standardized test scores of college-bound students, the four datasets were first combined into a single dataset, and a dummy variable was then created that indicated whether the school and its corresponding information were from 2019 or 2020. Many schools contained missing information for multiple variables, so these schools were removed. After this data clearing was performed, 1,741 of the 2,011 schools remained. VIF (variance inflation factor) stepwise variable selection was performed on the data to detect any multicollinearity, and two datasets were created with one containing the 25th percentile ACT cumulative score and the other containing the 75th percentile ACT cumulative score.

ACT scores were chosen as the variables of interest since there was no cumulative variable for the SAT. Both the 25th and 75th percentiles of the ACT scores will be studied based on the assumption that results will most likely differ for these due to the types of students that fall into these groups. The final dataset and models contain the 11 variables found in table 1 that pertain to the enrollment numbers of different races, the number of admitted female students, the number of men who applied, and the total number of students enrolled. The use of the demographic characteristics are meant to act as fixed effects. ACT scores can be impacted by the percentage of different races or genders of students because of various societal factors. By including these variables, this helps ensure that any differences seen in ACT scores do not reflect any factors to which race and gender might be tied. Interaction terms between the race variables and the yr20 variable were considered, but preliminary models were run that deemed these insignificant.

## Files Included
1. adm2019_rv.csv: academic enrollment statistics per college for 2019 admissions cycle
2. adm2020_rv.csv: academic enrollment statistics per college for 2020 admissions cycle
3. adm2019.xlsx: contains descriptions of variables included in adm2019_rv.csv
4. adm2020.xlsx: contains descriptions of variables included in adm2020_rv.csv
5. ef2019a_rv.csv: demographic enrollment statistics per college for 2019 admissions cycle
6. ef2020a_rv.csv: demographic enrollment statistics per college for 2020 admissions cycle
